Operating Systems Functions

System Start Up

One of the most important functions of an OS is to start up the computer.  When the power button is pressed the power supply sends a current to the circuitry.  This current resets the processor chips and as a result the firmware runs a POST.  This is a self-diagnostic that insures proper functionality in the hardware.  Upon verification that things are working properly the bootloader moves from storage to memory which loads the OS.  Next the kernel layer is moved to memory and performs a check on hardware communications.  The final step is for the application layer to take over which will load the UI where on most modern computers the user can login, activating their prefferred settings such as antivirus software.


Managing Memory

Another important OS function is to manage the RAM.  The OS will call programs from the storage and assign them a place in the RAM.  In addition to calling these programs up, the OS will also monitor how these programs are running.  The memory of a computer has limited capacity and if this gets reached the OS will use parts of the hard drive for virtual memory to allow processes to continue.  This trade is called a swap file and the maximum amount that can be swapped is called a page.  Using virtual memory is not ideal because storage media typically runs much slower than memory.  After a program is done being used the OS removes it from the memory (and the virtual memory) and back into its place in storage.


Updating Operating System Software

An OS also checks for corrections or additions to its own program.  These changes are known as an update and most OS will automatically check for these updates and depending on the user settings it will apply or ask for permission to apply the changes.  This allows developers to actively improve the functionality and efficiency of the OS but in some cases these updates can also make an OS unstable.  When this happens developers must release another update to increase stability in the OS.  Since software and hardware are constantly being improved it is important for these updates to be applied to keep up with new security threats and optimize OS efficiency.
